---
layout: animal_category
title: Bears
common_name: Bears
type: Mammal
red_list_status: Least Concern
---

### Introduction

Bear, any of a group of mammals distinguished by a large, stocky body; powerful limbs; dense fur; and a short, stumpy tail. Bears live in North America, South America, Europe, and Asia, where they occupy a wide range of habitats, including mountain, forest, and Arctic wilderness. Over the last century bear populations have steadily declined as humans have overhunted bears and encroached on their habitat. Climate change may also threaten some bears, especially polar bears in the Arctic.

*Zoologists* (scientists who study animals) classify eight species of bears: giant panda, spectacled bear, sun bear, sloth bear, Asiatic black bear, American black bear, brown bear, and polar bear. All of these species, with the exception of some populations of spectacled bears and sun bears, live north of the equator. Bears are not currently found in Africa, Australia, or Antarctica. All bears share a similar anatomy, but individual species vary in size, diet, and type of habitat. For example, polar bears live in frozen Arctic wilderness, where they feed primarily on seals, while sun bears live in Asian rain forests and dine on insects, fruits, nuts, and small animals. Reaching weights of 800 kg (1,760 lb), polar bears may grow 12 times larger than their smaller cousins the sun bears, which rarely exceed 66 kg (146 lb) in weight.

Bears have long fascinated humans. Ancient cave art and more recent paintings and sculpture illustrate the fear as well as admiration with which people regard the awesome power and acute intelligence of bears. In fairy tales, bears are the symbolic image of brave deeds. In folk literature, the bear’s habit of disappearing in winter months and emerging in spring evokes a theme of spiritual renewal, the replenishment of food, and the return of prosperity.

In modern times, as the recreational use of parks and wilderness areas has grown dramatically, humans have experienced increased contact with bears. Bear attacks on humans are rare, however. American black bears killed fewer than 40 people during the 20th century. Grizzly bears, a type of brown bear, are more dangerous, but attacks on humans are still rare. In United States national parks that are home to grizzlies, injury rates from grizzly bears are about one person per 2 million visitors. Bears prefer to avoid humans, but when attacks do occur, they are usually the result of humans surprising these nervous, shy, and easily frightened animals.

### Physical Description

Bears are bulky animals with wide shoulders, a short back, short and thick legs, broad paws, and a short tail. They have an elongated head, rounded ears that stand straight up, small eyes, and a long snout. Bears hunt for food using an acute sense of hearing. Bears may have the best sense of smell of any mammal—some can detect odors up to a mile or more away. Bear eyesight is probably similar in acuity (sharpness) to human vision. Black bears, and likely other bears, have color vision, which helps them identify ripe fruits and nuts.

Bears have 32 to 42 teeth, depending on the species, and these teeth reflect a varied diet of both plants and animals. Although all bears are members of the order Carnivora and are meat eaters, all but polar bears have become omnivorous—that is, they eat many types of foods, including lichens, roots, nuts, fruits, berries, seaweed, grasses, honey, grubs, caterpillars, and ants. Bear teeth are not as sharp or specialized for shearing meat as are those of some other carnivores, such as cats. For instance, canine teeth in most carnivores are generally large and pointed and are used for killing prey. In bears, however, these teeth are relatively small, and bears typically use them more to defend themselves or as tools. The molar teeth of bears are broad and flat, adapted to shredding and grinding plant food into small, easily digested pieces.

Bears have four limbs that end in paws. Each paw has five long, sharp claws that are unretractile—unlike cats, bears are not able to retract their claws. Depending on the species, these claws may be used to climb trees, rip open termite nests and beehives, dig up roots, or catch prey. Bears walk differently than most carnivores, which tend to walk on their toes in a way that is adapted for speed. Like humans, bears have a plantigrade stance, walking with their weight on the soles of their hindfeet, with the heel touching the ground, while the toes of the forefeet are used more for balance. This distribution of weight toward the hindfeet gives bears a lumbering gait. Although bears are slower than most other carnivores, such as lions and wolves, a running bear can still reach speeds of 50 km/h (30 mph). Bears are far stronger than other carnivores, and their limbs are more flexible and agile.

Bear fur is long and shaggy. Fur color varies among species, ranging from all white, blonde, or cream to black and white to all black or all brown. Fur color may also vary within a species. American black bears, for instance, may be black, brown, reddish-brown, or bluish-black. Several species, such as the sun bear and spectacled bear, have lighter-colored chest and facial markings.

Males are larger than females in all bear species, but the difference between the sexes varies and is greatest in the largest species. Huge male polar bears may weigh twice as much as female polar bears, while smaller male and female sun bears are similar in weight.

The life span of bears is not well known. The range seems to be about 25 to 40 years. Bears in the wild tend to die at a younger age than do their counterparts in zoos.

### Bear Behavior

Bears mostly live alone, except for mothers and their cubs, and males and females during mating season. Bears form temporary groups only in exceptional circumstances, when food is plentiful in a small area. Alaskan brown bears may collect in the same area to feed on salmon during the annual salmon runs, when salmon swim up river to reach their spawning grounds. Recent evidence also suggests that giant pandas may form small social groups, perhaps because bamboo is more concentrated than the patchy food resources of other bear species. Other bears may live alone but exist in a social network. A male and female may live in an overlapping home range—although they tolerate each other, each defends its range from other bears of the same sex. Male young usually leave their mothers to live in other areas, but female young often live in a range that overlaps with that of their mother.

The key to a bear’s survival is finding enough food to satisfy the energy demands of its large size. Bears travel over huge territories in search of food, and they remember the details of the landscape they cover. They use their excellent memories to return to locations where they have had success finding food in past years or seasons. Most bears are able to climb trees to chase prey or gain access to additional plant vegetation. The exceptions are polar bears and large adult brown bears—their heavy weight makes it difficult for them to climb trees. 

Little is known about communication among bears. Vocalizations and movements of the mouth and ears appear to be communication methods used by most species. Scent marking for communication is done by urine or by rubbing trees. When they need to act threatening or fight, bears tend to stand up on their hind legs, perhaps to appear larger to their rivals. They use their clawed forepaws to slash at their opponents.

Bears that live in regions with cold winters spend the coldest part of the year asleep in sheltered dens, including brown bears, American and Asiatic black bears, and female polar bears. Pregnant females give birth in the winter in the protected surroundings of these dens. After fattening up during the summer and fall when food is abundant, the bears go into this winter dormancy to conserve energy during the part of the year when food is scarce. Winter sleep differs from hibernation in that a bear is easily aroused from sleep. In addition, a bear’s body temperature drops only a few degrees—an American black bear with an active body temperature of around 38°C (100°F) will undergo a moderate drop in body temperature to about 34°C (93°F). In contrast, a true hibernator undergoes more extensive changes in bodily functions. For instance, the body temperature of the Arctic ground squirrel drops from 38°C (100°F) to as low as -3°C (27°F).

### Reproduction

Reproduction is seasonal for most bears. For bears living in temperate zones with four seasons, mating occurs in the spring after bears emerge from winter sleep. Bears that live in tropical regions, such as sloth bears, mate during the dry season. A male and female typically stay together for one to two weeks during mating season, mating many times before going their separate ways.

After mating, the gestation, or pregnancy, period generally ranges from seven to nine months, depending on the species. The actual development period of the unborn young is not as long as the gestation period suggests because the embryo passes through a period of delayed implantation. In this process, the newly forming embryo halts development and becomes inactive for as long as six months. The embryo then resumes its activity and becomes implanted in the wall of the female’s uterus, where its development proceeds rapidly. In the American black bear an embryo formed from a June mating may not become implanted until sometime in November. This delayed implantation enables birth to coincide with a bear’s winter sleep. The vulnerable newborns, born within the safety of dens, receive additional warmth and protection as they share close quarters with their mother. 

Bears usually produce litters of one to three cubs. Like most carnivores, bear babies are smaller at birth than the young of most other mammals, sometimes weighing 1 percent or less of their mother’s body weight. A newborn giant panda cub weighs around 113 g (4 oz). All bear young are born blind, toothless, mostly hairless, and completely helpless. They grow quickly, nourished by milk from their mother that is high in fat. By about three months of age, cubs leave the den to forage for food with their mother.

Cubs are weaned at about six months of age but stay with their mother for two to three or more years while they learn from her what to eat and where to find food. Mothers also try to protect their cubs from adult males, which sometimes kill cubs. This behavior on the part of males may be a strategy to increase breeding opportunities, as females without cubs will be more readily available to mate.

Females become sexually mature at four to seven years of age and may then produce young every two to five years. In general, the age at which a bear first reproduces comes earlier when food is abundant and later when food is limited.

### Evolution

Bears are the youngest of the carnivore families, having arisen from doglike ancestors during the Eocene Epoch, around 55 million to 38 million years ago. The earliest bears had the characteristics of both dogs and bears, with heavy-set features and blunter teeth than those of true dogs. Modern bears appeared in Eurasia around 5 million years ago during the late Miocene Epoch. These bears were relatively small animals, but some types eventually grew quite large. They diversified and spread through Europe, Asia, and North America, eventually reaching South America. Fossils indicate that bears once lived in Africa, with one large primitive species found as far south as present-day South Africa.

Among the extinct bears was the largest land-living mammalian carnivore. The giant short-faced bear was almost twice as big as today’s brown bear. Unlike modern bears, it was lightly built, with long legs and feet that enabled it to run fast. It was likely a powerful hunter capable of killing large prey. However, recent research suggests it may also have used its size and strength to chase other predators away from their kills. The giant short-faced bear lived in North America during the Pleistocene Epoch, from 1.6 million to 10,000 years ago. The earliest people to reach North America, perhaps as early as 15,000 years ago, must have found this animal truly frightening. The short-faced bear spread into South America. Scientists believe the spectacled bear is a smaller relative of this extinct bear.

Perhaps the most famous extinct species is the great cave bear, which lived in Europe around the Middle and Late Pleistocene and became extinct around 10,000 years ago. Its bones have been found in caves from Spain to the Caucasus. The largest deposit of remains is that of the Drachenhohle caves in Austria, which contain the remains of about 30,000 cave bears. Many of the remains are those of animals that over the centuries died in the caves during their winter dormancy, probably as a result of illness, lack of food, or old age. Distinguished by a massive skull and a domed forehead, this bear was as large as the modern Alaskan brown bear. Its teeth indicate that it ate an almost exclusively vegetarian diet. Cave drawings created by Ice Age humans show that they occasionally hunted cave bears. For several thousand years the modern brown bear and the cave bear co-existed, but the cave bear became extinct around 10,000 years ago.

The modern brown bear first appeared in Asia during the Middle Pleistocene Epoch and then spread to North America and Europe, even reaching northern Africa. A population of brown bears that lived along the coast became specialized for hunting seals, eventually evolving into the polar bear around 700,000 years ago. The American black bear dates to before the Late Pleistocene, and unlike today’s black bears, these prehistoric black bears grew as large as modern grizzlies. The first giant pandas appeared in Europe in the late Miocene and were found in eastern Asia during the Pleistocene Epoch.

### Bears and Humans

Humans have hunted bears since prehistoric times, using bear flesh for food and bear fur to make clothing. Early humans may have learned which plants were edible by watching cave bears forage for food. More recently, humans have contributed to the decline of bear populations worldwide, mainly by encroaching on bear habitats through farming, settlement, logging, and mining. Despite laws protecting bears, people continue to hunt bears for sport, for food, to protect crops and livestock, and for certain bear parts used in a variety of traditional medicines. Six of the existing eight species of bears are listed as endangered or vulnerable according to the World Conservation Union (IUCN) Red List issued in 2007. Only the brown bear and the American black bear are not considered threatened or endangered within their natural ranges.

As humans encroach on bear habitats, the opportunity for humans and bears to interact is becoming more and more common. In general, bears prefer to avoid humans, but often they have no choice but to enter suburbs and other populated areas in search of food. Humans may also stumble upon bears that are foraging for food in wilderness areas. Bear attacks are extremely rare, and most human encounters with a bear that result in the bear responding aggressively are the result of humans surprising bears and causing them to feel threatened. 

Bears can be attracted to food or food waste left by people, although high-calorie human food is unhealthy for bears to eat. Polar bears sometimes forage at open garbage dumps in Arctic areas, risking encounters with humans. Bears in wilderness parks where people camp may seek out garbage or food kept at campsites. Special food and garbage storage containers have been designed to block access to bears. Bears that enter camping areas to find food are a danger to people and must either be relocated or destroyed.

To avoid dangerous encounters with bears, the Minnesota-based American Bear Association, a nonprofit organization, recommends that people who come into contact with a bear not run away. A bear can easily outrun a human. Instead, the association advises people to stay calm and avoid direct eye contact with the bear. According to the association, people should talk to the bear in a soothing voice, try to appear larger by raising their arms over their head, and slowly back away from the bear and retreat from the area, making a wide detour around the bear. Because of their extremely acute sense of smell, bears can often be deterred from attacking by irritating chemicals in bear-spray products.